=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

puconfig - a program for deploying user configuration files accross several hosts

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<puconfig> [I<COMMAND>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

puconfig (portable user configs), is a program that assists in deploying user
configs (ie. bashrc, ssh config, vimrc etc.) to many hosts.  It reads a config
file, and then, depending on various settings, copies or symlinks the configs
in place.

It can also generate a redistributable shell script, that you can copy onto
other machines and run to install your configs. Additionally it can automate
this, and do the copying and running itself.

=head1 COMMANDS

=over

=item B<setup>

Set up this host according to the settings in puconfig.yml in the current
directory.

=item B<script>

Generate a self-hosted shell-script that contains all your config files and
your settings for how and when to install them. It reads puconfig.yml and
writes puconfig.sh. That .sh embeds all of your configs, in addition to the
logic on how to install them. The .sh only needs a working unix environment to
run, and it should then be possible to simply copy it to any host and run it.

=item B<deploy> I<host1> I<host2> ..

Generates a self-hosted shell script, and then connects to each host specified
via ssh and runs it.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FORMAT

At its core the configuration is a YAML file, and thus follows the normal YAML
syntax.

For a really quick introduction, see the I<EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION> section.

The filename is I<puconfig.yml>, and should live along with your configs
(though it can live anywhere if you are happy using absolute paths).

The config files are symlinked by default when using B<setup>. When using
B<script> or B<deploy> they are copied by default. Settings for each config can
alter this behaviour.

Note that B<all> conditions must match.

At the root of the file, there are two keys, "files" and "aliases". The
latter is optional, see the section on aliases for more information.

=head1 files

Each key under "files" is a the path to a file. This path is either absolute,
or relative to the directory that puconfig.yml lives in. You may use globs (ie.
*) in order to match several files.

=head2 Basic example

    files:
        some.conf:
            …

=head2 Settings

The following settings are available under each config.

=over

=item I<target> (B<required>)

This should contain the path to where to write the config. ~ will be expanded
to the current user's home directory, and if the target is a directory then that
will be expanded to a file with the same basename as the source file in that directory.

Note that if the source file is a glob, then target MUST be a directory path
(ie. end with /).

Example: I<target: ~/.some.conf>

=item I<hosts> (condition, optional)

A (YAML) list of hosts to install this config file on. If the current host does
not match this hostname (substring match), then this config file will be
skipped.

Example: I<hosts: [ 'example', 'mydesktop' ]>

=item I<notHosts> (condition, optional)

A (YAML) list of hosts NOT to install this config on. If the current host matches
this hostname (substring match), then this config will be skipped.

Example: I<notHosts: [ 'mylaptop', 'myphone' ]>

=item I<users> (condition, optional)

A (YAML) list of users to install this config file on. If the current user does
not match this username (substring match), then this config file will be
skipped.

Example: I<users: [ 'example', 'myuser' ]>

=item I<notUsers> (condition, optional)

A (YAML) list of users NOT to install this config on. If the current user matches
this username (substring match), then this config will be skipped.

Example: I<notUsers: [ 'guest', 'shared' ]>

=item I<alwaysCopy> (optional, default false)

Configs are symlinked by default when in B<setup> mode. This will make
I<puconfig> make a copy instead.

Example: I<alwaysCopy: true>

=item I<removeIfSkipped> (optional, default false)

If this is set to true then "target" gets "rm -f"ed if the conditions for
this entry is not matched.

Example: I<removeIfSkipped: true>

=item I<chmod> (optional)

Chmod the file to the specified mode after installing it.

Example: I<chmod: 700>

=item I<hardlink> (optional, default false)

If this is true then the file will be hardlinked instead of symlinked when in
B<setup> mode (it will still be copied in script or deploy mode).

Example: I<hardlink: true>

=item I<scriptBefore> (optional)

Script to run before installing a config. This will be executed once puconfig
has decided that the config should be installed, but a I<scriptBefore> can
override this. To override it, you can set the variable "skip" to 1, which will
skip the file (and thus a scriptBefore block can function as a condition, if
you want it to).

Since scripts are usually a block, you should use the "|" syntax of YAML (see
the example below).

See B<SCRIPTING> for scripting syntax.

Example (skips this file if ~/.some-directory does not exist):

    scriptBefore: |
        if [ ! -e ~/.some-directory ]; then
            skip=1
        fi

=item I<scriptAfter> (optional)

Script to run after a config has been installed.

Since scripts are usually a block, you should use the "|" syntax of YAML (see
the example below).

See B<SCRIPTING> for scripting syntax.

Example:

    scriptAfter: |
        chmod 700 ~/.ssh

=back

=head1 aliases

Aliases can be used similarly to variables in the config file. It lets you
define something once in the config, and then reuse it elsewhere.

To define an alias, add an entry under "aliases". To reference it, prefix it by "$"
in a setting.

Note that this currently has a limitation in that you can only use aliases in
settings, they are not expanded inside settings. So: "hosts: $MY_HOSTS" is valid,
while "hosts: [ $MY_HOSTS ]" is not.

Example:

    files:
        some.conf:
            hosts: $MY_HOSTS
    aliases:
        MY_HOSTS: [ 'host1', 'host2' ]

=head1 SCRIPTING

I<scriptBefore> and I<scriptAfter> blocks allow you to make additional
customizations to conditions on when to install configs (scriptBefore) and add
aditional actions once the config is installed (scriptAfter). The scripts are
shell scripts, and you should avoid using bashisms since /bin/sh is used to run
the script.

In the blocks you have access to certain variables and functions that are part of
the public puconfig API (note that functions from the shell-header.sh file are not
considered public unless listed here, and should be avoided).

=head2 Variables

The following variables are available, as indicated, either only in I<scriptAfter> blocks, or both I<scriptBefore> and I<scriptAfter>.

=over

=item I<copyFile> (scriptAfter only)

$copyFile is a boolean variable. It is "1" if the file will be copied, "0" otherwise.

=item I<targetFile> (both scriptBefore and scriptAfter)

This is the absolute path to the config file that is currently being written.

=item I<skip> (scriptBefore (available, but useless in scriptAfter))

You may set this variable to 1 in a I<scriptBefore> block if you want the
current file to be skipped (ie. not be installed on the current host).

=back

=head2 Functions

The following functions are available to both I<scriptBefore> and
I<scriptBefore> blocks.

=over

=item I<hostname_match> host1 host2 ..

This returns a shell true (0) if the current hostname matches ANY of the
arguments provided to it.

=item I<username_match> user1 user2 ..

This returns a shell true (0) if the current username matches ANY of the
arguments provided to it.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION

    files:
        public/shell/bashrc:
            target: ~/.bashrc
            scriptAfter: |
                if [ ! -e ~/.bash_profile ]; then
                    echo "source ~/.bashrc" > ~/.bash_profile
                fi
        public/shell/bashrc_desktop:
            target: ~/.bashrc_desktop
            hosts: $Desktops
        public/shell/shell_shared_termux:
            target: ~/.shell_shared_termux
            scriptBefore: |
                if [ ! -e /data/data/com.termux/files/usr/bin/termux-info ]; then
                    skip=1
                fi
        forward:
            alwaysCopy: true
            target: ~/.forward
            notHosts: ['n1','n2','n3','n4','n5']
        gitignore:
            target: ~/.gitignore
            chmod: 600
        gpg-agent.server.conf:
            target: ~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf
            hosts: serenity
            notUsers: root
            alwaysCopy: true
            scriptAfter: |
                if [ -x /usr/bin/pinentry-curses ]; then
                    echo "# Auto-added by setup script" >> $targetFile
                    echo "pinentry-program /usr/bin/pinentry-curses" >> $targetFile
                fi
        rclone.conf:
            alwaysCopy: true
            target: ~/.rclone.conf
            chmod: 600
            hosts: $Desktops
            users:
                - zerodogg
                - eskild
    aliases:
        $Desktops: ['browncoats','firefly','wash','river','kaylee','jayne','zoe','whitefall','miranda']

=head1 HELP/SUPPORT

If you need additional help, please visit the website at
L<http://random.zerodogg.org/puconfig>

=head1 DEPENDENCIES

The standalone scripts require nothing other than a working unix environment.

The program itself needs perl, with several perl modules that are not in core:
YAML::XS, String::ShellQuote, File::Temp, Moo, File::Basename

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

If you find a bug, please report it at L<http://random.zerodogg.org/puconfig/bugs>

=head1 AUTHOR

B<GoldenPod> is written by Eskild Hustvedt I<<code aatt zerodogg d0t org>>

=head1 FILES

=over

=item I<./puconfig.yml>

The file containing the configuration.

=back

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) Eskild Hustvedt 2018

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
